---
title: "Ethereum development notes"
description: "This blog post is a couple of things I learned a long the way when developing my own ethereum applications" 
pubDate: "Jul 02 2022"
---

Implementing [recurring payments](https://ethereum.stackexchange.com/questions/49596) on Ethereum is not as easy as I thought it'd be. It's hard to create recurring payments because in Ethereum, only EOAs "Externally Owned Accounts" (humans) can create transactions. A CA "Contract Account" like Pethreon, can't create a transaction. In ethereum, a "transaction" is any action from an EOA that changes the state of the ethereum network. Sending ethereum from one person to another is the simplest form of transaction. The more complicated form of transaction is when an EOA sends a transaction to a CA. 

This means Pethreon can't create a transaction every period (day/week/month), only a human can create a transaction every period (day/week/month) which sort of defeats the whole point of using this application. [There's a couple ways people have gotten around this though](https://ethereum.stackexchange.com/questions/42). You can have an EOA create a single transaction, and then your Dapp (smart contract / CA) can evaluate that transaction "eagerly" or "lazily". Sergei solved this problem by evaluating that transaction lazily (and I take up after Sergei). So what happens is a contributor makes a donation, and in order for that creator to get their money, they themselves must create a transaction that triggers a withdraw function in my smart contract. This function then tallies up how much they're owed up until that point from all their contributors and then they cash out. If the creator doesn't know about the app or withdraw from it, they don't get paid.

If I wanted to handle things eagerly, I would need to use a decentralized service like [Ethereum Alarm Clock](https://www.ethereum-alarm-clock.com/) to pay EOAs (strangers) to make transactions for me to pay everyone out at the end of every period. The creator would no longer have to know about my app. I thought this would be too costly for people, and more difficult to implement.

You might ask yourself "why can't we just give the EVM a callback function that it runs on some kind of time interval?". It doesn't work because you can't have a function linger in the EVM for that long, it would eat up too many resources and cost too much gas. The EVM doesn't have anything like an "asynchronous callback" that you can call at a later point in time (as far as I'm aware).