---
title: 'opinion - vanilla web components should be avoided'
description: 'This post talks about my opinion on vanilla web components and why I think they should be avoided in favour of web component libraries.'
pubDate: 'Jul 02 2022'
---

TLDR: In my opinion, web component libraries such as [lit](https://lit.dev/) or [stenciljs](https://stenciljs.com/) should be used almost exclusively over vanilla web components because JSX (or any other template engine) has significantly better DX over `shadowRoot|template.innerHtml = `

I don't consider myself to be an opinionated developer and I'm often skeptical of people who say one frontend/backend framework is better than another. There's no issue with having a _preference_ for a certain framework, and there's also cases where performance considerations must prevail (i.e. C++/rust/golang over python). But in general, I find that once you get into the groove of writing idiomatic code in any popular framework, they're all pretty good and tend to follow strong software design principles. I enjoy the dependency injection in Angular, and I also like the flux pattern used in React, etc. Where I differ, is when it comes to using vanilla web components. And in particular, the use of `shadowRoot.innerHtml = ` or `template.innerHtml = `. 

Writing HTML in a string (without any IDE or extension support) is pretty awful because you lose out on too much stuff. You lose code completion, suggestions, formatting, syntax highlighting, emmet, spell checking, etc. I think it makes the code much harder to read, write and maintain. Typos made in a <style></style> tag for example, are esentially undetected. Indentation no longer snaps into place automatically whenever you format code and instead it's now **your** responsibility to make sure that everything is nested correctly at compile time.

In vanilla JS, I usually write as much HTML as I can in a static HTML file (with full IDE support) and then refer to innerHtml whenever I need to render dynamic HTML (like when I'm rendering data I just got back from a server). But in web components, you have to write that static HTML in JS too, which is not pleasant for the reasons I gave earlier. I could use `document.createElement()` along with `shadowRoot.appendChild()` but I don't think this looks good, especially for larger components. The code tends to look quite verbose or overly descriptive when I tried doing it that way. I think web component libraries like the ones I mentioned earlier are the way to go.